# Resolving Packages With mopack

Most package managers allow developers to pull dependencies from a remote source
and prepare them for use by your build system. In this regard, mopack is no
different.

!!! note
    mopack is careful not to use the term "install"; depending on context,
    installation can refer to one of two very-different concepts:

    1. *Resolve*: to fetch a dependency from its origin and preparing it
       (usually by building) for use by the root project (e.g. `conan install`)
    2. *Deploy*: to copy any files from the dependency needed for running the
       root project into their final locations (e.g. `make install`)

## Resolution

The first step in working with dependencies is, unsurprisingly, getting them.
This is really two sub-steps rolled into one: fetching and building. This
typically involves downloading the appropriate files from some remote source
(possibly recursively in the case of [source
distributions](../reference/sources.md#source-distribution)) and then compiling
any projects as needed in the proper order, using their respective build
systems.

In most cases, this step should occur *before* configuration of the
root project's build (for build configuration systems that natively support
mopack, such as [bfg9000][bfg9000], this happens automatically). However, when
run manually, users should invoke the following command:

```sh
$ mopack resolve /path/to/project/
```

This will get all the dependencies specified in `/path/to/project/mopack.yml`
and collect the info necessary to use them in `./mopack/`. If your build dir is
*not* the current directory, you can specify another location with `--directory
/path/to/builddir/`.

You can also specify multiple paths when resolving, including specific
filenames:

```sh
$ mopack resolve . mopack-special.yml
```

This can be useful for providing alternate configurations or for adding
mopack configurations automatically generated by a tool.

!!! note
    Packages and options specified in later files *override* previous values.

### Local configuration

Projects that use mopack often contain their own `mopack.yml` configuration;
however, when building such a project, you may not want to use this
configuration (or may only want to use parts of it). In this case, you can
provide your own `mopack-local.yml` file to override the project's
configuration. When passing a directory to `mopack resolve`, mopack will look
for both `mopack.yml` and `mopack-local.yml`, with any packages or options
specified in the latter file will override those in the former. Thus, if both
`mopack.yml` and `mopack-local.yml` exist, `mopack resolve .` is equivalent to:

```sh
$ mopack resolve mopack.yml mopack-local.yml
```

## Usage

Once a project's dependencies are ready to use, the next step is actually using
them. Generally, this step occurs *during* the root project's configuration
step. To get a package's usage information, run the following command:

```sh
$ mopack usage some-package
```

This will return the package's [usage](../reference/usage.md) information in
YAML format (or JSON if `--json` is passed), which can then be fed to the
dependent build steps.

Some packages contain [submodules](writing.md#submodules), representing optional
components that you may or may not want to use (e.g. individual libraries from
the Boost package). In this case, you can specify the submodules you want to use
in a particular situation when invoking `mopack usage`:

```sh
$ mopack usage some-package -ssubmodule1 -ssubmodule2
```

## Deployment

Finally, some projects may want to deploy dependencies alongside the project's
own binaries (e.g. when running `make install`). This step (generally performed
during the root project's `make install` process, naturally) runs whatever
commands are necessary for each dependency to deploy them to the final
destination:

```sh
$ mopack deploy
```

Any dependency whose `deploy` property is true (the default) will then be
deployed.

[bfg9000]: https://jimporter.github.io/bfg9000/
